GMAT Installation for Linux -- Release R2011a  (An Alpha Release) 
---

Welcome to the wonderful world of GMAT!

This readme file provides instructions for setting up the Linux version of GMAT, 
including guidelines for launching the application and setting up an application 
launcher on your desktop.  

The Linux build of GMAT is considered an alpha release.  The system has been 
tested extensively to validate script based execution and numerical correctness, 
but the graphical user interface has only been lightly tested.

The Linux application included in this package was built on Ubuntu Linux 10.10 
64-bit (Maverick Meerkat).  Files that are needed to run GMAT (startup and data 
files, along with a shell script launcher, sample missions, and several GMAT 
plugins) are included.  The build files and source code can be downloaded from 
the GMAT website:
	
	http://gmat.gsfc.nasa.gov

or from Sourceforge:

	http://sourceforge.net/projects/gmat


INSTALLATION AND CONFIGURATION

GMAT for Linux is released as a gzipped tarball archive.  The tarball is 
installed by running the command

	tar -zxf gmat-linux-x64-R2011a-Alpha.tar.gz

This command extracts the GMAT system into a folder named GMAT-R2011a.  Inside 
of that folder you will find eight subfolders: bin, data, docs, matlab, output, 
plugins, samples, and userfunctions.  The GMAT executable is located in the bin 
folder, along with libraries that GMAT uses and two application launchers, 
RunGmat.sh and RunGmatLauncher.sh.  

The Linux application (Alpha version) includes the ability to make calls to 
MATLAB based functions from GMAT scripts.  Calls cannot be made from MATLAB to 
GMAT with the current application.  To use MATLAB with GMAT, the application 
must include the path to MATLAB's shared libraries in the load library path used 
when the application is launched.  If you are planning to use MATLAB with GMAT, 
you should open each of the shell script launchers and update the path 
information to identify the location of MATLAB on your system.  MATLAB is 
configured to launch from /opt/matlab/R2009b on the Linux build machine, so that 
is the setting in the shell scripts.

The shell script RunGmatLauncher.sh contains information about where GMAT is 
installed on your system as part of a change directory (cd) command.  The 
default location is ~/GMAT-R2011a; update that location if you installed GMAT to 
a different folder.  

The Linux application is launched by running one of the RunGmat... shell 
scripts.  Each script file sets GMAT's load library path, and then launches the 
application.  If you would like to create a desktop shortcut to launch GMAT, set 
your launcher to run the "RunGmatLauncher" shell script.  You might want to set 
the icon for the launcher as well; GMAT's icon images are located in the 
GMAT-R2011a/data/graphics/icons folder.


LIBRARY DEPENDENCIES

There are two system dependencies for the Linux build of GMAT 2011a:

* GMAT is written in C++, and requires a recent version of libstdc++ (the C++ 
  shared libraries) to run.

* GMAT 2011a uses the Fortran shared library for MSISE90 atmospheric modeling, 
  so you will need to install GFortran 4.4 or later.  This dependency will be 
  removed from later builds.


RUNNING GMAT

The Linux (and Mac) builds of GMAT do not support the interface to the fmincon 
optimizer.  For that reason, some of the sample missions that run on Windows - 
those that use fmincon based optimization - will not run in the Linux build.  
However, the other sample missions included in this Linux distribution do run 
successfully, and provide an excellent introduction to using GMAT.  (Sample 
missions that use the VF13ad optimizer require a plugin that cannot be delivered 
with GMAT.  Please see GMAT's forum pages for instructions about this 
optimizer.)  

To run the sample missions:

1. Start GMAT by double-clicking on the RunGmatLauncher.sh shell script 
   (alternatively, you may open a terminal window, cd to bin folder of the 
   directory where GMAT was installed, and type "./RunGmat.sh").

2. Open one of the sample missions preloaded as a recent script on the Welcome 
   Panel.

3. Press the green "Run" button on the toolbar.  The script should run, and 
   display the output from the selected script.


ADDITIONAL SUPPORT

For additional help configuring and running GMAT, the GMAT team has a set of 
forums and wiki pages located at

	GMAT Forums:      http://gmat.ed-pages.com/forum/index.php
	GMAT Wiki Pages:  http://gmat.ed-pages.com/wiki/tiki-index.php

Please feel free to contact the GMAT team for further information, to make 
suggestions, or for assistance with any problems you encounter running the 
system.  We're glad to help!

---
Darrel Conway
GMAT Linux developer
e-mail:  gmat@thinksysinc.com
